In this video I'm going to talk to you about an operation called the inverse in particular the matrix
inverse.
I will explain why the Matrix Inverse is useful why we need something like this.
I'll tell you what are the conditions for a matrix to have an inverse because not all matrices actually
have an inverse and in the exercise you will learn about something called these pseudo inverse which
is something that you can apply when the full inverse doesn't exist.
So I'm going to get started with this really really simple equation.
This is something from way back in Algebra 1.
So how would you solve for x in this equation.
Well you're probably thinking that you know you just divide both sides of the equation by three and
then you're done.
You have X isolated on the left hand side.
That's true.
And I'm just going to rewrite that in a slightly different way.
So I'm going to say that we multiply both sides of this equation by three to the power of minus one.
Now of course three to the power of minus one is simply one divided by three.
And why do you do this.
Why do you multiply both sides of the equation by three to the power of minus one.
Well you do that because you want to cancel this three.
You want to get rid of this three over here so we can isolate X..
So when you multiply three by this number three to the power of minus one that just gives you one.
And of course one times x is just x.
So we could actually say that three to the power of minus one is the inverse of three the inverse it's
the number that you multiply by three to basically cancel out the three and get a one instead.
Okay.
So with that in mind when we get to linear algebra we run into a similar type of problem.
So here we might have a matrix equation a X equals B where A is a matrix of known values B as a vector
of known values and X is a vector of unknown values.
So we have we don't know what's in the X here.
So what we need to do is solve for x.
And so the way to solve for x is to isolate it on the left hand side of the equation.
And that means getting rid of this a somehow.
Now in linear algebra with matrices it's not possible to formally divide by a matrix the way that you
can divide a single number.
So instead we need to come up with some other matrix which is called a inverse or the inverse of A.
It's indicated with a minus one in a superscript such that when you multiply a inverse times a you end
up with the identity matrix and you already know what the identity matrix is from a few videos ago and
you also saw in that video that the identity matrix times another matrix or times another vector is
that same matrix or vector.
So the identity makes us here just drops.
So in other words we need a concept like the Matrix Inverse in order to solve an equation or solve for
x in an equation like this.
So that seems fine.
However the matrix inverse is not as trivial as the single number inverse.
In fact not all matrices have an inverse.
There are two conditions on a matrix in this case matrix A for that matrix to have an inverse.
So a matrix has an inverse or it's called an inverted l matrix.
If the matrix is square that means it has the same number of rows as columns and if that matrix is something
called full rank and that means that every column provides unique information in the matrix it's not
possible to create one column by some combination of other columns.
So I'm going to give you a few examples so you get a bit of an intuition for what these two properties
mean.
So here you see a bunch of matrices five matrices.
Now all of these matrices are square.
So they all satisfy the first criteria for Matrix inverter ability.
So let's discuss this second point full rank.
The question is can you create this column in this matrix by some multiple of this column.
So a scalar vector multiplication of this column.
And the answer is no.
So you can multiply one times six and get six.
But if you multiply seven times six you don't get to.
OK.
So that means that this column and this column are independent of each other.
This matrix has an inverse.
Now let's consider this matrix.
The question is again can you create this column by some multiple of this column.
Now in this case the answer is actually yes.
You take this column multiply it by two and then you get this column.
So this column doesn't actually add any new unique information to the Matrix.
It's just a multiple of this column.
So even though this is a where matrix it is not full rank it is not in vertical.
This is also sometimes called a singular matrix.
Okay here's the next Matrix.
Now this matrix is clearly full rank it's clearly convertible.
There's no way that you can multiply one by any number to get zero.
So this is definitely going to be in vertical.
Here we have a whole column of zeros.
Now you can get to a column of zeros by multiplying this column by zero of course.
So not in vertical.
And then here of course this is also an inverted bowl matrix.
It's not possible to get this column by multiplying this column by a single number.
All right.
So now let's switch to Python and let's see what in vertical matrices look like what their inverse is
look like and what it looks like when you multiply the matrix by its inverse so I'm going to get started
by creating a matrix.
This will be a five by five matrix.
I'll call it Matrix a.
Because that's what I call it in the slides.
Now I'm going to make this matrix be a random dot Rand and I'm going to make this matrix B random numbers
between minus five and plus five and I will make this be a square matrix so an m by m matrix.
Now there's an interesting property of random number matrices which is that they are pretty much guaranteed
to be in vertical.
So if you have a matrix of random numbers as long as it's square it's pretty much always going to be
in vertical.
Okay.
And now to compute the inverse I'll call this a n.
So we use the function num pi.
Lynn ouch that in.
Hey.
And let's see what these matrices look like so I will print out a and a.
And.
Okay maybe I'll for increased visibility.
I think I'll do this on separate lines.
So as a couple of interesting things to note about the Matrix and its inverse.
First of all the inverse of a matrix is not simply the inverse of each individual element.
So it's not like this first element in the inverse is 1 over 5 and 1 over one and well 1 over 0 isn't
even a valid number.
So the relationship between the matrix inverse and the original matrix is really tricky it's basically
impossible to see if I just showed you these numbers this matrix there's no way that you would just
sort of look at it and guess that this was the inverse of this matrix.
Okay.
What I'd like to do now is show you what these two matrices look like.
So let's see.
I want these to be all next to each other in subplots.
So I'm going to use fig X peel teed up so plots and the subplot geometry is going to be one by three
because I want one row of plots and three columns of plots.
All right.
So then the first subplot is going to be I am show of a.
And I'll set the title here to be set title and just make this a.
All right.
So then I will do some copy pasting.
Let's see the second one which is index one that's going to be a inverse.
And I will use some latex coding here to say the inverse.
So minus 1 in the superscript.
Let's see now what I want to do here in the third subplot which is index 2 is multiply the matrix by
its inverse.
So this is a Times a inverse.
And let's see what this looks like what's a little typo here.
This should be the add symbol for matrix multiplication not element Y is multiplication which is what
you get with the asterisk.
And I also just notice that this should be a six because the upper bound is always exclusive here.
There you go.
This looks much nicer.
So here you see the original Matrix random numbers matrix it's inverse and the matrix times its inverse
gives us the identity matrix.
This is the matrix with all zeros on the off diagonals and ones on the diagonals and what I'd like to
do now is show you what happens when you try to create a matrix inverse from a matrix that doesn't fit
one of the two criteria.
So first I'm going to make this matrix B five by six instead of five by five.
Okay.
And we get an error in the error message says well last student.
So that's actually not a super helpful error message.
But the problem is with the line computing the inverse.
And of course the problem here is that The Matrix needs to be square.
Okay.
So now what I'd like to do is change this matrix so that one of the columns is actually a repeat of
another column.
So I'm gonna say that the zero with column is a repeat of the first column.
And so what I'm doing now is imposing some dependencies in the columns and this was related to the second
criterion for Matrix invert ability in fact to show you this.
I'm even going to move this line up here and on comment it so you can see what the Matrix looks like.
So you see that the first two columns are identical.
And this was the idea that I discussed in the slides and we get an error message.
The error message says singular matrix in this video.
I introduced you to the idea of a matrix inverse and told you about the conditions for the matrix inverse
to exist.
I think I'm going to put the exercise into its own video so that it doesn't get too long.
All in one video.
So stay tuned.
Don't go away.
Keep watching for the next video.
You will learn about these pseudo inverse.